DD-221: document option blocks, record extension, `system` capabilities and `let`/`else` (#4594)
dfinity/motoko: doc/md/writing-motoko/pattern-matching.md

### Exhaustiveness (coverage) checking

At runtime, a switch expression may wind up scrutinizing a value to which none of its alternative patterns apply, generating an undesired trap.

> To detect the possibility of such runtime failures, the Motoko compiler checks for the exhaustiveness of pattern matching by keeping track of the covered shape of the scrutinee. The compiler issues a warning for any non-covered scrutinees. Motoko even constructs a helpful example of a scrutinee that is not matched. A useful by-product of the exhaustiveness check is that it identifies and warns about dead or redundant alternatives that can never be matched.
> 
> ## Refutable patterns and dealing with non-matching data
> 
> Numerous times one is only interested in specially formed data and desires to summarily handle all non-matching forms. The `let`-`else` construct is designed precisely for this pupose. Whereas the regular destructuring `let` allows to focus on a single given pattern, it invariably traps if the right hand side data doesn't match it (this is also warned at compile-time). The `else` clause gives the programmer a way to deal with refuted matches, such as bailing out of the processing or logging a message before trapping. As such, `let`-`else` is similar to a two-`case` `switch` in a compact form, that additionally doesn't force the indentation of the processing logic following it.
> 
> The below example illustrates how you can write a non-indenting `if`-`else` by resorting to a `let`-`else` in your code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To detect the possibility of such runtime failures, the Motoko compiler checks for the exhaustiveness of pattern matching by keeping track of the covered shape of the scrutinee. The compiler issues a warning for any non-covered scrutinees. Motoko even constructs a helpful example of a scrutinee that is not matched. A useful by-product of the exhaustiveness check is that it identifies and warns the developer about dead or redundant alternatives that can never be matched.

## Refutable patterns and dealing with non-matching data

Developers may only be interested in specially formed data with a desire to directly handle all non-matching forms. The `let`-`else` construct is designed precisely for this purpose. Whereas the regular destructuring `let` allows to focus on a single given pattern, it invariably traps if the right-hand side data doesn't match it, which is warned at compilation. The `else` clause gives the programmer a way to deal with refuted matches, such as bailing out of the process or logging a message before trapping. As such, `let`-`else` is similar to a two-`case` `switch` in a compact form that additionally doesn't force the indentation of the processing logic following it.

The below example illustrates how you can write a non-indenting `if`-`else` by resorting to a `let`-`else` in your code:
```

``` motoko
let true = isLoggedIn(customer) else return;
// process message for logged-in customer

> ```

Reviewer 2: This example isn't very motivating since you could just use 
```
is (!IsLoggedIn(customer)) return';
... 
```
What about something that binds some identifiers? Along the lines of (unchecked):
```
let (?record) = map.get(map, customer) else return Error.error("no such customer")
````

Author: Yeah, this is "parse, don't validate". Good point.

Reviewer 2: I'll  use this from Claude...

``` motoko
func getName(optionalName : ?Text) : Text {
  let ?name = optionalName else return "Unknown";
  name
}
```

The expression (or block) following the `else` must be of type `None` signifying that its execution trajectory mustn't contribute to the code immediately following the `let` declaration.

## Option blocks for streamlined processing of optional data

> Pattern matching on optional data (of type `?T`) is a preferred technique for avoiding the dreaded `null`-exeption problems known from other languages. However,' switch'ing  on several options can lead to tedious coding and deeply nested sources. To remedy these problems, Motoko provides *option blocks* (`do ? { ... }`) that allow safe unwrapping of options using a postfix `!` operator. Every use of the `!` in the block corresponds to a `switch` on some option, with the additional short-cut behavior that if `!` is applied to a `null` value, the entire block stops evaluation and immediately returns `null`.

Author: ```suggestion
Pattern matching on optional data (of type `?T`) is a preferred technique for avoiding the dreaded `null`-exeption problems known from other languages. However, `switch`-ing  on several options can lead to tedious coding and deeply nested sources. To remedy these problems, Motoko provides *option blocks* (`do ? { ... }`) that allow safe unwrapping of options using a postfix `!` operator. Every use of the `!` in the block corresponds to a `switch` on some option, with the additional short-circuiting behavior that if `!` is applied to a `null` value, the entire block stops evaluation and immediately returns `null`.
```

> The expression (or block) following the `else` must be of type `None`, thus signifying that its execution trajectory mustn't contribute to the code immediately following the `let` declaration.
> 
> ## Option blocks for streamlined processing of optional data
> 
> Pattern matching on optional data (of type `?T`) is a preferred technique of avoiding the dreaded `null`-exeption problems known from other languages. However `switch`ing on several options can lead to tedious coding and deeply nested sources. To remedy these problems, Motoko provides *option blocks* (`do ? { ... }`) that allow safe unwrapping of options using a postfix `!` operator. Every use of the `!` in the block corresponds to a `switch` on some option, with the additional short-cutting behaviour that if `!` is applied to a `null` value, the entire block stops evaluation and immediately returns `null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The expression (or block) following the `else` must be of type `None` signifying that its execution trajectory mustn't contribute to the code immediately following the `let` declaration.

## Option blocks for streamlined processing of optional data

Pattern matching on optional data (of type `?T`) is a preferred technique for avoiding the dreaded `null`-exeption problems known from other languages. However,' switch'ing  on several options can lead to tedious coding and deeply nested sources. To remedy these problems, Motoko provides *option blocks* (`do ? { ... }`) that allow safe unwrapping of options using a postfix `!` operator. Every use of the `!` in the block corresponds to a `switch` on some option, with the additional short-cut behavior that if `!` is applied to a `null` value, the entire block stops evaluation and immediately returns `null`.
```

Author: Maybe the word I was searching for is _short-circuiting_. @crusso?
